about - Nagaland Empowerment of People through Economic Development (NEPED)
was formed by the Govt. of Nagaland in 1994 as an autonomous Government
registered society vide Regd.NO.H/RS-4238 Dated 19-04-2005 and
Regd.NO.HOME/SRC-6751 Dated 07-07-2014. It was established to bridge
developmental gaps in various sectors for economic development and
empowerment with a team of multi-disciplinary government employees known
as Project Operations Unit (POU) with the aim to carry out studies across
Nagaland and identify major issues and to encourage and spread new ideas for
sustainable development of the state. The overall aim was envisaged at
building a strong resilience towards the emerging Climate Change issues.



more data - NEPED-I undertook a project for planting trees along with jhum (slash and burn/ Shifting
cultivation) practiced by different tribes in Nagaland. The project has established 1794 test plots (2
test plots each, measuring 3 hectares per village) in jhum fields in 854 villages across all (8) the
districts covering all 16 tribes of Nagaland. More than 7.8 million economic trees were planted in
5500 hectares with replication ratio of 1:6. Through this project more than 7000 farmers and 2000
state government officials had undergone various training programmes for capacity development.
Amount INR 1285 Lakhs = (Approx) USD 4,000,000.
Funded by the ICEF (Indo-Canada Environment Facility) under CIDA, Building upon Traditional
agriculture in Nagaland, 1995-2000.
NEPED-II had focus on creating a micro credit mechanism in the villages, through which a paradigm
shift from subsidy oriented mindset of the people towards self-reliance was created. NEPED’s
approach was a novel approach to acclimatize the people to a banking economy without a culture
shock. The women groups and formal SHGs were also empowered to access the village funds, in
the process, the villagers created permanent assets and adopted many forms of agro-forestry
through cultivation of high valued perennial cash crop. They also cultivated vegetable and other
short term crops in these plots and recovered the loans by selling the farm produces.
Amount INR 1285 Lakhs = (Approx) USD 4,000,000.
Funded by the ICEF (Indo-Canada Environment Facility) under CIDA, Adding value to Shifting
cultivation in Nagaland. 2001-2006.
NEPED-III is concentrated on consolidating the achievements of the first two phases through
watershed development. An area of 17,930 ha of arable and non-arable land was treated
employing soil erosion control measures, and Reforestation through nurtured natural regeneration
and enrichment plantation, enhancing tree population in Jhum fallow, preservation of fire
tolerant poles and encouraging maintenance of naturally regenerated tree saplings through
selective weeding. Direct sowing of tree seeds, where there is less population, and also managing
the coppices from cut stumps. These activities also acted in strengthening community Biodiversity
conservation. Through this project another 6600 jhumias were assisted with a menu of land based
livelihood activities such as piggery, poultry, goatery, rabbitry, apiculture, blacksmith, carpentry,
weaving, rice mills, fishery, basketry, carving etc.
Amount : INR 1782 Lakhs= (Approx) USD 4,000,000
Funded by the Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operation for Watershed
Development Project in Shifting Cultivation Areas (WDPSCA), 2006-2012.
To develop mechanisms for the community conservation efforts in Nagaland, NEPED had
played advocacy role, wherein communities were advice to set aside areas within village lands, with
restrictions on hunting, fishing and logging by way of resolutions passed by the village councils.
Conservation of our natural resources will strengthen biodiversity leading to livelihood benefits.
NEPED in collaboration with Salim Ali Center for Ornithology &amp; Natural History (SACON) has
implemented NEPED-SCEN program in Nagaland with the following objectives of formation of joint
community conservation areas, to assist villages, which have or propose to have community
conservation areas, in developing biodiversity registers, resource maps and management plans, and
develop the process by which biodiversity registers are legally protected. Advocate and assist in the
establishment of community conservation areas where such efforts are currently lacking. Identify
technical, developmental and financial requirements of community conservation areas. Provide

Draft
necessary technical support and linkages to information, processes, markets and developmental
programs to the villages that are developing community conservation areas. Use the Blyth’s
Trogopan, which is the state bird of Nagaland, as a flag-ship species in enhancing conservation reach.
Amount : INR 238 Lakhs = (Approx) USD 530,000
Funded by Sir Dorabji Ratan Tata Trust (SDTT), Strengthening Community Conservation Efforts in
Nagaland, 2007-2010



Success stories:
Over the last 25 years, NEPED has acquired considerable credibility across Nagaland
and beyond. The emerging need for the agro-enterprises that have risen from NEPEDs effort, is to meet energy requirements necessitated to enable Naga farmers to compete in
a global market. Hence, a dedicated team of mul

ti-disciplinary experts has been formed by
the Government of Nagaland, with full autonomy, to address the challenges brought about
by these developmental achievements. NEPED’s e

ffort in bringing about a paradigm shi
ft in
the mindset of the rural folks had amassed immense credibility within the country, as well
as from the interna

tional community. It had been serving as knowledge bank for
researchers, related Government Departments, NGOs, etc. even from beyond na
tional

borders. In the renewable energy sector,

till date, NEPED had installed 108 hydrogers (pico
units) with generator capacity of 3KW all over the state. Most of the installed units are
community based. More than ever, NEPED society has a bigger role to play foreseeing the
challenges in transforming the society for a be

tter world with the change of

times. As such,
NEPED has delivered extraordinary performance and excellent overall achievements
consistent with the project objec
tives, par
ticularly with respect to promo

tion of agro-
forestry, development of demonstration models for jhum crop improvement,

intensi
fica
tion, its sustainability, resource management and economic development, thrust
on income generation and women empowerment. In 854 villages, covering 5500 hectares
across Nagaland, 1794 "test plots" were set up in jhum fields in 1995-2000. It was not just
tree plantation, but micro planning with the villagers, equity based approach, empowering
gaps assessed and addressed, land use system, erosion control, increasing productivity,
identifying best/good practices, "Search & Find" and reviving of TKS (Traditional Knowledge

System). The achievement in the transformation of tree farming/plantation into a state-
wide movement has been exemplary. "NEPED's potential for mapping, conserving,

developing and exploiting the enormous bio-diversity of the Northeast marks it out as a
critical lead programme. The necessary funding, manpower development and other
support required for its careful evaluation and refinement for replication or adoption
elsewhere in the Region must be made available." Shukla Commission Report: Government
of India, March 1997.
NEPED has been ushering in several inputs to the communities for a solution to
alternative means of livelihoods by way of imparting different techniques, innovations and
livestock models in rural areas. Till 2013, NEPED had assisted 4200 resource poor families
under various projects (WDPSCA funded by Ministry of Agriculture, GoI; Enhancing
livelihood through community based piggery funded by NRTT and State Plan fund) across
Nagaland by means of supplying pig breeding stock, fattening stock, construction of low
cost scientific pig sties, improved feed and feeding practices, insurance and prevention &
control of Classical Swine Fever (CSF). The introduction of Livestock Service Provider (LSP)
model in project villages has significant impact in containing CSF that is responsible for loss
of millions of rupees annually. Another innovation, designed and developed by NEPED is
‘Foddorizer’ which is helping rural farmers in improving feed and feeding practices of pig
and reduction in firewood consumption to a tune of 1.5 lac trees per year.